Revising the building knowledge graph sections Part 1 (#23)
greenelab/knowledge-graph-review: content/03.text-mining.md

## Building Biomedical Knowledge Graphs

Knowledge graphs can be constructed in many ways using resources such as pre-exisitng databases or text.

> Usually, knowledge graphs are constructed using pre-existing databases and these databases are constructed by domain experts using approaches ranging from manual curation to automated techniques, such as text mining systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, knowledge graphs are constructed using pre-existing databases and these databases are constructed by domain experts using approaches ranging from manual curation to automated techniques, such as text mining.
```

> Manual curation is an extensive process that involves domain experts reading papers and detecting sentences that assert a relationship.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manual curation is a time consuming process that requires domain experts to read papers and annotate sentences that assert a relationship.
```

> Instead of using domain experts to read papers automated approaches rely on machine learning or natural language processing techniques to rapidly detect sentences of interest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Automated approaches rely on machine learning or natural language processing techniques to rapidly detect sentences of interest.
```

We categorize these automated approaches into the following groups: rule-based extraction, unsupervised machine learning, and supervised machine learning and discuss examples of each type of approach while synthesizing their strengths and weaknesses.

### Constructing Databases and Manual Curation

Database construction can date back all the way to 1956 where the first database contained a protein sequence of the insulin molecule [@doi:10.4172/jcsb.1000081].
This process involves gathering relevant text such as journal articles, abstracts, or web-based text and having curators read the gathered text to detect sentences that implicate a relationship (i.e. relationship extraction).
Notable databases constructed by this process can be in found in Table {@tbl:manual-curated-databases}.
An example database, COSMIC [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1121] was constructed via a group of domain experts scanning the literature for key cancer related genes.

> This database has reached close to 35M entries in 2016 [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1121] and grew to a total of 45M entries in 2019 [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky1015].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This database contained approximately 35M entries in 2016 [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1121] and by 2019 had grown to 45M entries [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky1015].
```

Studies have shown that databases constructed in this fashion contain relatively precise data, but in low quantifies [@doi:10.1038/nmeth1209-860; @doi:10.1038/nmeth.1284; @doi:10.1093/database/bau058; @doi:10.1093/nar/gku1205; @doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2103-8; @doi:10.1093/database/bax043; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btm229].
This happens because the publication rate is too high for curators to keep up [@doi:10.1007/s11192-010-0202-z].
This bottleneck highlights a critical need for future approaches to scale fast enough to compete with the increasing publication rate.

Semi-automatic methods are a way to accelerate the curation process [@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.11.001; @doi:10.1093/database/bau067; @doi:10.1093/database/bas010; @doi:10.1145/3269206.3269229; @doi:10.1093/database/baz068; @doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2103-8; @doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2021-9].
The first step of these methods is to use an automated system to initially extract sentences from text.

> This process removes irrelevant sentences, which dramatically decreases the amount of text curators will have to sift through.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This process removes irrelevant sentences, which dramatically decreases the amount of text that curators must sift through.
```

> Following the pre-filtering step, curators will then need to approve or reject the remaining sentences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the pre-filtering step, curators then approve or reject the remaining sentences.
```

> It was discovered that this approach saved curators an average of 2-2.8 hours compared to manual efforts [@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.11.001; @doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2013-001837]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach saved curators an average of 2-2.8 hours compared to manual efforts [@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.11.001; @doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2013-001837]. 
```

> Despite automated systems excelling in identifying sentences for commonly occurring relationships, they tend to miss out on lessor known relationships [@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.11.001].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite automated systems excelling in identifying sentences for commonly occurring relationships, they tend to miss lessor known relationships [@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.11.001].
```

> Plus, these systems have a hard time parsing ambiguous sentences that naturally occur in text, which makes correcting them a challenging task [@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.11.001].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These systems also have a hard time parsing ambiguous sentences that naturally occur in text, which makes correcting them a challenging task [@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2010.11.001].
```

| Comparative Toxicogenomics Database [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky868] | A database that contains manually curated chemical-gene-disease interactions and  relationships. | 2,429,689 | Chemicals (Drugs), Genes, Diseases | Drug-Genes, Drug-Disease, Disease-Gene mappings | Manual curation and Automated systems |
| Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1004] | Manually curated database that contains information about the molecular basis of antimicrobial resistance. | 174,443 | Drugs, Genes, Variants | Drug-Gene, Drug-Variant mappings | Manual curation |
| OMIM [@pmid:30445645] | A database that contains phenotype and genotype information | 25,153 | Genes, Phenotypes | Gene-Phenotype mappings | Manual Curation |
Table:
A table of databases that used a form of manual curation to populate entries. 
Reported number of entities and relationships are relative to time of publication.
{#tbl:manual-curated-databases}

### Text Mining for Relationship Extraction

#### Rule-Based Relationship Extraction

> Rule based-extraction consist of identifying essential keywords and grammatical patterns to detect relationships of interest. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rule based-extraction consists of identifying essential keywords and grammatical patterns to detect relationships of interest. 
```

Keywords are established via expert knowledge or though the use of pre-existing ontologies, while grammatical patterns are constructed via experts curating parse trees. 
Parse trees are tree data structures that depict a sentence's grammatical structure and come into two forms: a constituency parse tree (Figure {@fig:constituency-parse-tree-example}) and a dependency parse tree (Figure {@fig:dependency-parse-tree-example}).
Both trees use part of speech tags, labels that dictate the grammatical role of a word such as noun, verb, adjective, etc, for construction, but represent the information in two different forms.
Constituency parse trees breaks a sentence down into a subphrases (Figure {@fig:constituency-parse-tree-example}) while dependency path trees analyzes the grammatical structure of a sentence (Figure {@fig:dependency-parse-tree-example}).
Many text mining approaches [@doi:10.1093/database/bay108; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw503; @doi:10.1186/s13326-017-0168-3] use such trees to generate features for machine learning algorithms and these approaches are discussed in later sections.

> In this section we focus on approaches that use mainly rule based extraction to detect sentences that allude to a relationship.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section we focus on approaches that use rule based extraction as a primary strategy to detect sentences that allude to a relationship.
```

Grammatical patterns can simplify sentences for easy extraction [@pmid:21346999; @pmid:24850848].
Jonnalagadda et al. used a set of grammar rules inspired by constituency trees to reshape complex sentences with simpler versions [@pmid:21346999] and these simplified versions were manually curated to determine the presence of a relationship.
By simplifying sentences this approach achieved high recall, but had low precision [@pmid:21346999].
Other approach used simplification techniques to make extraction easier [@doi:10.1093/database/baw156; @doi:10.1186/1471-2105-15-285; @doi:10.1093/database/bav020; @doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004391].
Tudor et al., simplified sentences to detect protein phosphorylation events [@doi:10.1093/database/bav020].
Their sentence simplifier broke complex sentences that contain multiple protein events into smaller sentences that contain only one distinct event.
By breaking these sentences down the authors were able to increase their recall; however, sentences that contained ambiguous directionality or multiple phosphorylation events were too complex for the simplifier.

> As a consequence the simplifier missed out on detecting relevant sentences [@doi:10.1093/database/bav020].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a consequence the simplifier missed some relevant sentences [@doi:10.1093/database/bav020].
```
